README.md, before:

# ZPath and ZTemplate

ZPath is a programmer-friendly syntax for searching structured objects. If you can navigate a filesystem and code an if-statement in C, Java or JavaScript, you already know 95% of the syntax.

ZTemplate is a template system replacing Mustache `{{ expressions }}` with ZPath expressions. It's both trivial and immensely powerful.

The grammar is universal: there's currently support for JSON, CBOR, XML and Java Collections.

| Path | Matches |
| --- | --- |
| `/body` | all nodes called `body` inside the root node |
| `*/td`| all grandchildren of the context node called `td` |
| `**`| the context node and all its descendents |
| `#2`| the third child of the context node (indices starts at zero) |
| `../tr#0` | the first node called `tr` of the context node's parent |
| `../tr[is-first()]` | the same |
| `../tr[index() == 0]` | the same |
| `../tr[index() == 0]/td` | all `td` children of the same|
| `**/tr[count(td) == 2]`| all nodes at or below the context called `tr` with two `td` children |
| `body[**/tr[count(td) == 2]]`| all `body` children that match the above description |
| `car[!age \|\| type(age) == "null"]` | all `car` children where `age` is missing or set to `null`|
| `car[!!age]` | all `car` children with child `age` not `null` or `false` |
| `[key() != ix]` | all children where the key its stored as in its parent != its `ix` value|
| `list/*[index() % 2 == 0]` | every even-numbered child of the `list` child |
| `car[is-first() ? "na" : age]` | for all `car` chidren, "na" if it's first, or its `age` child otherwise|
| `count(tr/td)` | if evaluated on a table, the number of cells in the table (a number) |
| `tr/count(td)` | the number of cells in each row of the table (a list of numbers) |
| `table[@class == "defn"]` | all `table` children with a class attribute of `defn` (XML only) |
| `[@* == "defn"]` | all children where any attribute equals `defn` (XML only) |
| `table/@class` | the class attribute of any `table` children, as a string (XML only) |
| `**/bowl/*, **/fruit`|all descendents where parent is `bowl` or that are called `fruit`|
| `union(**/bowl/*, **/fruit)`|the same, but with duplicate nodes merged|

## ZPath Parsing

* an **expression** may be a **function**, a **path**, a string (in quotes), a number, or a combination of these using normal C-like operators
* binary operators `+ - * / % && || ^ & | == != >= <= > <` require whitespace on either side
* the ternary operator `? :` requires white-space either side of `?` and `:`. Unary operators `~` and `!` do not.
* a **path** is constructed like a UNIX file path, a list of **segments** seperated with `/`
* a path **segment** can be `*`, `**`, `..`, a **name**, an **index** (`#`integer), both (**name**`#`integer) or a **function**
* each **segment** may followed by zero or more **qualifying expressions** (an **expression** inside square brackets)
* a **qualifying expression** may never follow a `/` in a path unless it is the root `/`
* a function is a **name** immediately followed by `(`, zero or more **arguments** seperated by commas, then a `)`
* **arguments** depend on the function, but are typically **expressions**
* that characters `\n \r \t ( ) [ ] / , = & | ! < > #` and space in a **name** must be backslash-escaped
* finally, the top-level expression _only_ may be a comma-separateed list of **expressions**

When comparing, `==` and `!=` use the Java equals() contract - what this means depends on the model,
but generally in JSON, two strings in the model with the same value are equal.

## ZPath Evaluation
* Evaluation starts with a _context node_ which is supplied by the caller, which forms the initial **node set**
* Each path **segment** or **qualifying expression** is applied to the current **node set**, resulting in a new **node set**  which is processed by the next segment or qualifying expression.
* **qualifying expressions** are evaluated for each node in the current **node set** - if _true_ the node is included in the next **node set**. A **path** is _true_ if it evaluates to one or more nodes of any value.
* **function** **segments** are used as in XPath 2.0; they are also called once for each node in the current **node set**, and the output is included in the next **node set**

## Functions

### Structural and Type functions
| Function | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `count()` | the number of nodes in the current **node set** |
| `count(expression)` | the number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `index()` | the index of this node in the the current **node set** |
| `index(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its index into its parent|
| `key()` | the key to retrieve this node from its parent (an integer for lists, _typically_ a string for maps)|
| `key(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, the key to retrieve it from its parent|
| `union(expression, ...)` | the set union of each **expression** (no duplicates) |
| `intersection(expression, ...)` | the set intersection of each **expression** |
| `is-first()` | shorthand for `index() == 0`|
| `is-last()` | shorthand for `index() == count() - 1`|
| `next()` | if this node can be retrieved from its parent with an **index**, the node at the next index |
| `prev()` | the same, but reutrn the node at the previous index |
| `string()` | the string value of the current node (an empty set if no string value exists) |
| `string(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its string value |
| `number()` | the number value of the current node (an empty set if no number value exists)|
| `number(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its number value |
| `value()` | the primitive value of the current node |
| `value(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its primitive value |
| `type()` | the type of this node as a string|
| `type(expression)` | the type of each node mached by **expression**, or `"undefined"` if it is an empty set|
| `eval(expression)` | evaluate the expression and add the results to the **node set** |

Types depend on the object type, and is dependent on the backing implementation. It's recommended that:

* JSON has `string`, `number`, `list`, `map`, `boolean` and `null`
* CBOR has all those, and also `buffer`
* XML has at least `element`, `text`, `processing-instruction` and `comment`

The `eval(expression)` function is used in a path - for example, `item/eval(num(price) * num(quantity))` would
return a list of numbers, each one value of the `price` * `quantity` children of each item. Functions that return
nodes from the tree are required to merge duplicates first.


### Math functions
| Function | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ceil()` | the ceiling value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `ceil(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its ceiling value |
| `ceil()` | the floor value of all number nodes in the current **Node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|| `floor(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its floor value |
| `ceil()` | the rounded value of all number nodes in the current **Node set** (an empty set if none are nubmers)|| | `round(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its rounded value |
| `sum()` | the sum of all number nodes in the current **node set** (0 if none are numbers)|
| `sum(expression)` | the sum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `min()` | the minimum value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `min(expression)` | the minimum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `max()` | the maximum value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `max(expression)` | the maximum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|



## API
```java
import me.zpath.ZPath;

Object context = ...;
ZPath path = ZPath.compile("table/tr[td]");
List<Object> match = ZPath.evaluate(context).all();  // List of zero or more matches
Object match = ZPath.evaluate(context).first();      // The first match, or null if none
```

A ZPath can be compiled once and reused in multiple threads.
`context` can be any type of object recognised by an `EvalFactory` registered with the implementation. The API ships with implementations for:

* `org.w3c.dom.Node`
* `com.bfo.json.Json` (see http://faceless2.github.io/json)
* `com.google.gson.JsonElement` (see https://github.com/google/gson)
* `java.util.Map` and `java.util.Collection` - traversed without reflection (tested with Jackson and Gson)


# ZTemplate

ZTemplate allows the substutution of ZPath queries into a template. It is based on [Mustache](http://mustache.github.io), which claims to be logic-less but requires the
programmer to provide all the logic in the model.

ZPath expressions include both logic and context, so the syntax for using them in a template can be trivial.

* `{{ expression }}` will be replaced by the value of the expression
* `{{# expression }} content {{/ expression}` will evaluate the expression then process `content` for each matching node, evaluating any nested expressions against that node.
* `{{> path }}` will include the specified template from the specified path and apply it. Include depths are limited (by default, to 3) so recursive includes will fail

```html
<h1>{{person/name}}</h1>

{{# person/items }}
  {{# is-first() }}
    <h2>Items: {{ count() }}</h2>
  {{/ is-first() }}
  Name: {{ name }}<br>
  Price: {{ price }}<br>
  Units: {{ units }}<br>
  Total: {{ num(units) * num(price) }}<br>
{{/ person/items }}
```

ZPath expressions can include `/` or `#` - whitespace around an expression removes any ambiguity.

## FAQ

* **Why require whitespace around binary operators?** - because terms like `*` and `/` can also be used in a path: the ZPath expression `* * 2` means "multiply the numeric value of all children by 2". While it could have been done another way, it would be complex and difficult to diagnose when it went wrong. This rule is easy to remember and makes ZPath expressions more legible too
* **How are null, zero, false handled in boolean contexts?** - if you have an expression that is just a path, eg `[td]`, it will match if the expression matches one or more nodes, _regardless of value_. So if `td` is `false` or `null` it will match. To cause null values to evaluate as false it is `[td && type(td) != "null"]`. To cause null or false values to evaluate as false, the easiest way is `[!!td]`, to also identify sero values its `[!!td && td != 0]`, and so on
* **Why not use JSONPath**? Because it is very limited and has a peculiar grammar that only applies to JSON
* **Why not use JMESPath**? Because it is very complicated and has a peculiar grammar that only applies to JSON
* **Why not use XPath?** It only applies to XML. Also, it has a grammar which <strike>is peculiar</strike> I struggle to remember without a cheat-sheet. Expressions are largely interchangeable across most programming languages; Paths are implemented the same way in URLs and files. These concepts are familiar and should be reused if at all possible.
* **Why don't you have a function that does X?** - I want a core set of concepts that translates to all structures. But please suggest it in the issues. 
* **Are there other implementations?** No, but I would welcome them. The code is fairly concise and the concepts simple - it should port easily to most languages.
* **[Mustache](http://mustache.github.io) or [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com) are simpler** Only on the surface. Logic-less templates are myth; logic is _always_ required, the question is where you put it. These solutions move all the complexity to the model, usually requiring custom accessor methods or twisting the model to fit the template. Other solutions like JSP go the other way, mixing code and tags in a terrible punctuation soup. XSLT is XML specific so it's verbose, overcomplex and not à la mode, but is twinned with XPath and has the right sort of ideas. ZPath and ZTemplate are inspired by XSLT, focussing on sets of nodes, but ensuring all the complexity is in one place: ZPath.

Commit message:

Added index-of, last-index-of, substring, string-length

README.md, after:

# ZPath and ZTemplate

ZPath is a programmer-friendly syntax for searching structured objects. If you can navigate a filesystem and code an if-statement in C, Java or JavaScript, you already know 95% of the syntax.

ZTemplate is a template system replacing Mustache `{{ expressions }}` with ZPath expressions. It's both trivial and immensely powerful.

The grammar is universal: there's currently support for JSON, CBOR, XML and Java Collections.

| Path | Matches |
| --- | --- |
| `/body` | all nodes called `body` inside the root node |
| `*/td`| all grandchildren of the context node called `td` |
| `**`| the context node and all its descendents |
| `#2`| the third child of the context node (indices starts at zero) |
| `../tr#0` | the first node called `tr` of the context node's parent |
| `../tr[is-first()]` | the same |
| `../tr[index() == 0]` | the same |
| `../tr[index() == 0]/td` | all `td` children of the same|
| `**/tr[count(td) == 2]`| all nodes at or below the context called `tr` with two `td` children |
| `body[**/tr[count(td) == 2]]`| all `body` children that match the above description |
| `car[!age \|\| type(age) == "null"]` | all `car` children where `age` is missing or set to `null`|
| `car[!!age]` | all `car` children with child `age` not `null` or `false` |
| `[key() != ix]` | all children where the key its stored as in its parent != its `ix` value|
| `list/*[index() % 2 == 0]` | every even-numbered child of the `list` child |
| `car[is-first() ? "na" : age]` | for all `car` chidren, "na" if it's first, or its `age` child otherwise|
| `count(tr/td)` | if evaluated on a table, the number of cells in the table (a number) |
| `tr/count(td)` | the number of cells in each row of the table (a list of numbers) |
| `table[@class == "defn"]` | all `table` children with a class attribute of `defn` (XML only) |
| `[@* == "defn"]` | all children where any attribute equals `defn` (XML only) |
| `table/@class` | the class attribute of any `table` children, as a string (XML only) |
| `**/bowl/*, **/fruit`|all descendents where parent is `bowl` or that are called `fruit`|
| `union(**/bowl/*, **/fruit)`|the same, but with duplicate nodes merged|

## ZPath Parsing

* an **expression** may be a **function**, a **path**, a string (in quotes), a number, or a combination of these using normal C-like operators
* binary operators `+ - * / % && || ^ & | == != >= <= > <` require whitespace on either side
* the ternary operator `? :` requires white-space either side of `?` and `:`. Unary operators `~` and `!` do not.
* a **path** is constructed like a UNIX file path, a list of **segments** seperated with `/`
* a path **segment** can be `*`, `**`, `..`, a **name**, an **index** (`#`integer), both (**name**`#`integer) or a **function**
* each **segment** may followed by zero or more **qualifying expressions** (an **expression** inside square brackets)
* a **qualifying expression** may never follow a `/` in a path unless it is the root `/`
* a function is a **name** immediately followed by `(`, zero or more **arguments** seperated by commas, then a `)`
* **arguments** depend on the function, but are typically **expressions**
* that characters `\n \r \t ( ) [ ] / , = & | ! < > #` and space in a **name** must be backslash-escaped
* finally, the top-level expression _only_ may be a comma-separateed list of **expressions**

When comparing, `==` and `!=` use the Java equals() contract - what this means depends on the model,
but generally in JSON, two strings in the model with the same value are equal.

## ZPath Evaluation
* Evaluation starts with a _context node_ which is supplied by the caller, which forms the initial **node set**
* Each path **segment** or **qualifying expression** is applied to the current **node set**, resulting in a new **node set**  which is processed by the next segment or qualifying expression.
* **qualifying expressions** are evaluated for each node in the current **node set** - if _true_ the node is included in the next **node set**. A **path** is _true_ if it evaluates to one or more nodes of any value.
* **function** **segments** are used as in XPath 2.0; they are also called once for each node in the current **node set**, and the output is included in the next **node set**

## Functions

### Structural and Type functions
| Function | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `count()` | the number of nodes in the current **node set** |
| `count(expression)` | the number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `index()` | the index of this node in the the current **node set** |
| `index(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its index into its parent|
| `key()` | the key to retrieve this node from its parent (an integer for lists, _typically_ a string for maps)|
| `key(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, the key to retrieve it from its parent|
| `union(expression, ...)` | the set union of each **expression** (no duplicates) |
| `intersection(expression, ...)` | the set intersection of each **expression** |
| `is-first()` | shorthand for `index() == 0`|
| `is-last()` | shorthand for `index() == count() - 1`|
| `next()` | if this node can be retrieved from its parent with an **index**, the node at the next index |
| `prev()` | the same, but reutrn the node at the previous index |
| `string()` | the string value of the current node (an empty set if no string value exists) |
| `string(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its string value |
| `number()` | the number value of the current node (an empty set if no number value exists)|
| `number(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its number value |
| `value()` | the primitive value of the current node |
| `value(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its primitive value |
| `type()` | the type of this node as a string|
| `type(expression)` | the type of each node mached by **expression**, or `"undefined"` if it is an empty set|
| `eval(expression)` | evaluate the expression and add the results to the **node set** |

Types depend on the object type, and is dependent on the backing implementation. It's recommended that:

* JSON has `string`, `number`, `list`, `map`, `boolean` and `null`
* CBOR has all those, and also `buffer`
* XML has at least `element`, `text`, `processing-instruction` and `comment`

The `eval(expression)` function is used in a path - for example, `item/eval(num(price) * num(quantity))` would
return a list of numbers, each one value of the `price` * `quantity` children of each item. Functions that return
nodes from the tree are required to merge duplicates first.


### Math functions
| Function | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ceil()` | the ceiling value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `ceil(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its ceiling value |
| `ceil()` | the floor value of all number nodes in the current **Node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|| `floor(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its floor value |
| `ceil()` | the rounded value of all number nodes in the current **Node set** (an empty set if none are nubmers)|| | `round(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its rounded value |
| `sum()` | the sum of all number nodes in the current **node set** (0 if none are numbers)|
| `sum(expression)` | the sum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `min()` | the minimum value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `min(expression)` | the minimum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|
| `max()` | the maximum value of all number nodes in the current **node set** (an empty set if none are numbers)|
| `max(expression)` | the maximum of all number of nodes matched by **expression**|

### String functions
| Function | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `index-of(search)` | the first index in each string in the current **node set** of the specified `search` string or -1 if not found|
| `index-of(search, expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, the first index into each string of the `search` string|
| `last-index-of(search)` | the last index in each string in the current **node set** of the specified `search` string or -1 if not found|
| `last-index-of(search, expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, the last index into each string of the `search` string|
| `string-length()` | the length of each string in the current **node set**|
| `string-length(expression)` | for each node matched by **expression**, if it's a string, the string's length|
| `substring(start, length)` | a substring of each string in the current **node set**, of `length` characters starting at `start`|
| `substring(expression, start, length)` | for each node matched by **expression**, its substring as defined above |


## API
```java
import me.zpath.ZPath;

Object context = ...;
ZPath path = ZPath.compile("table/tr[td]");
List<Object> match = ZPath.evaluate(context).all();  // List of zero or more matches
Object match = ZPath.evaluate(context).first();      // The first match, or null if none
```

A ZPath can be compiled once and reused in multiple threads.
`context` can be any type of object recognised by an `EvalFactory` registered with the implementation. The API ships with implementations for:

* `org.w3c.dom.Node`
* `com.bfo.json.Json` (see http://faceless2.github.io/json)
* `com.google.gson.JsonElement` (see https://github.com/google/gson)
* `java.util.Map` and `java.util.Collection` - traversed without reflection (tested with Jackson and Gson)


# ZTemplate

ZTemplate allows the substutution of ZPath queries into a template. It is based on [Mustache](http://mustache.github.io), which claims to be logic-less but requires the
programmer to provide all the logic in the model.

ZPath expressions include both logic and context, so the syntax for using them in a template can be trivial.

* `{{ expression }}` will be replaced by the value of the expression
* `{{# expression }} content {{/ expression}` will evaluate the expression then process `content` for each matching node, evaluating any nested expressions against that node.
* `{{> path }}` will include the specified template from the specified path and apply it. Include depths are limited (by default, to 3) so recursive includes will fail

```html
<h1>{{person/name}}</h1>

{{# person/items }}
  {{# is-first() }}
    <h2>Items: {{ count() }}</h2>
  {{/ is-first() }}
  Name: {{ name }}<br>
  Price: {{ price }}<br>
  Units: {{ units }}<br>
  Total: {{ num(units) * num(price) }}<br>
{{/ person/items }}
```

ZPath expressions can include `/` or `#` - whitespace around an expression removes any ambiguity.

## FAQ

* **Why require whitespace around binary operators?** - because terms like `*` and `/` can also be used in a path: the ZPath expression `* * 2` means "multiply the numeric value of all children by 2". While it could have been done another way, it would be complex and difficult to diagnose when it went wrong. This rule is easy to remember and makes ZPath expressions more legible too
* **How are null, zero, false handled in boolean contexts?** - if you have an expression that is just a path, eg `[td]`, it will match if the expression matches one or more nodes, _regardless of value_. So if `td` is `false` or `null` it will match. To cause null values to evaluate as false it is `[td && type(td) != "null"]`. To cause null or false values to evaluate as false, the easiest way is `[!!td]`, to also identify sero values its `[!!td && td != 0]`, and so on
* **Why not use JSONPath**? Because it is very limited and has a peculiar grammar that only applies to JSON
* **Why not use JMESPath**? Because it is very complicated and has a peculiar grammar that only applies to JSON
* **Why not use XPath?** It only applies to XML. Also, it has a grammar which <strike>is peculiar</strike> I struggle to remember without a cheat-sheet. Expressions are largely interchangeable across most programming languages; Paths are implemented the same way in URLs and files. These concepts are familiar and should be reused if at all possible.
* **Why don't you have a function that does X?** - I want a core set of concepts that translates to all structures. But please suggest it in the issues. 
* **Are there other implementations?** No, but I would welcome them. The code is fairly concise and the concepts simple - it should port easily to most languages.
* **[Mustache](http://mustache.github.io) or [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com) are simpler** Only on the surface. Logic-less templates are myth; logic is _always_ required, the question is where you put it. These solutions move all the complexity to the model, usually requiring custom accessor methods or twisting the model to fit the template. Other solutions like JSP go the other way, mixing code and tags in a terrible punctuation soup. XSLT is XML specific so it's verbose, overcomplex and not à la mode, but is twinned with XPath and has the right sort of ideas. ZPath and ZTemplate are inspired by XSLT, focussing on sets of nodes, but ensuring all the complexity is in one place: ZPath.
